Well, good morning.
For those of you who do not know me, my name is Dan.
I'm the executive pastor at Crossway.
And it's my joy to be here with you this morning.
It's always a special treat coming to Milford on Sunday mornings, particularly on Donut Sunday.
I missed that by a week.
But that's all right.
My wife and I drove out a little earlier so we could stop at Donut Fresh on the way out here.
And I got the last apple fritter.
And we were in line.
There's like three other people in front of us.
They're all looking at the donut cabinet.
I'm like, come on, come on, come on.
Gotta get the apple fritter.
Well, it's my joy to be here with you this morning and to open up God's word together.
Most Christians I know will readily admit that they should pray more, right?
I'm sure you have probably caught yourself saying that from time to time.
I certainly have said it myself.
It's almost instinctive for us.
We know prayer matters.
We know that it's a significant part of the life of faith.
And yet, if we're honest with ourselves, many of us struggle to explain why prayer is so essential to our lives
beyond just simply a sense of duty or discipline or responsibility.
But prayer isn't simply something Christians are supposed to do.
Prayer is something that we are invited into.
Prayer is the hidden place where our lives are actually formed.
Eugene Peterson says this about prayer.
He says, what we do in secret determines the soundness of who we are in public.
Prayer is the secret work that develops a life that is thoroughly authentic and deeply human.
I've yet to meet the person who has ever said,
You know, my life would be so much better if I just prayed less and not only prayed less but prayed more shallow prayers.
My life would be greatly increased if I just did those two things.
No, I've never heard anyone say that.
So today I want us to enroll briefly but intentionally in Jeremiah's School of Prayer.
not to learn techniques or formulas, but to see how deep unwanted pain became the very place where Jeremiah learned to pray honestly.
You see, in the middle of his rejection, in the middle of his loneliness, in the middle of his heartbreak, prayer became the place where God
met Jeremiah and he sustained him.
My question to you this morning is, are you facing hardship and heartache in your life right now?
Maybe that God is allowing whatever he is allowing in your life not to push you away, but to actually draw you in.
to draw you into a deeper experience of prayer than you have ever had in your life.
C.S.
Lewis once put it this way.
He said, God whispers in our pleasures, but he shouts in our pain.
God whispers in our pleasures, but he shouts in our pain.
If you have a Bible, turn with me
to Jeremiah 15.
And what we encounter here is one of Jeremiah's personal confessions.
You see, in the book of Jeremiah, we don't just hear what he preached publicly, we are given access to his inner life and his unfettered interactions with God.
This is sacred
ground that we are about to unpack this morning.
So if you are able and willing, would you please stand with me as we read together from God's Word?
Jeremiah 15, starting in verse 15.
You who know, oh Lord, remember me.
Take notice of me.
and take vengeance for me on my persecutors.
Do not, in view of your patience, take me away.
Know that for your sake, I endure reproach.
Your words were found and I ate them.
And your words became for me a joy and a delight of my heart.
for I have been called by your name, O Lord, God of hosts.
I did not sit in the circle of Marymakers, nor did I exalt, because of your hand upon me I sat alone.
For you filled me with indignation.
Why has my pain been perpetual and my wound incurable, refusing to be healed?
Will you indeed be to me like a deceptive stream with water that is unreliable?
Therefore, thus says the Lord, if you return, then I will restore you.
Before me, you will stand.
And if you exact the precious from the extract, the precious from the worthless, you will become my spokesman.
They for their part may turn to you.
But as for you, you must not turn to them.
Then I will make you to this people a fortified wall of bronze.
And though they fight against you, they will not prevail over you.
For I am with you to save you and deliver you, declares the Lord.
So I will deliver you from the hand of the wicked and I will redeem you from the grasp of the violent."
This is God's word.
You may be seated.
As we've been walking through Jeremiah in this series, we've seen a prophet called by God to speak both truth about the present and warning about the future.
And Jeremiah's message consistently exposes the gap between religious activity and genuine sincere faith and showing us how easily good things like tradition,
or even the temple itself can replace God at the center of our lives.
Again and again, God calls his people to repent, to reorder their loves and to return to him with undivided hearts.
Yet the people, they resist, right?
They resist and they remain stubborn.
and self-deceived.
And Jeremiah bears the emotional and the relational cost of faithfully delivering God's word to them.
That's a heavy burden to carry.
And here in chapter 15, we begin to see just how much that burden is starting to catch up with Jeremiah.
You see, he responds to this rejection in a way that any loving person would, right?
He grieves, he laments, and he weeps.
Right?
That's how we've come to know Jeremiah, right?
He's the weeping prophet.
In chapter nine, we see why he becomes known as the weeping prophet.
In chapter nine, verses one through two, Jeremiah says, Oh that my head were waters and my eyes a fountain of tears that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people.
Oh that I had in the wilderness a wayfarer's lodging place that I might leave my people and go from them for they are all adulterers.
An assembly of treacherous men.
Jeremiah weeps because Jeremiah cares.
He weeps because he cares.
He doesn't want to be right.
He wants the people of God to be restored.
And there's a unique pain in loving people who mistake love for hostility.
I mean, if you're the parent of a teenager, you know this well, right?
I hate you.
I don't ever want to talk to you again.
They respond to a decision that you made that was really just loving and then their best interest, right?
That's a tough place to be.
Returning to Jeremiah 15, we learned something foundational.
Jeremiah prays the emotions he actually feels.
He prays the emotions he actually feels, not the emotions he thinks he should feel.
Huge difference between those two things.
Jeremiah, he prays honestly.
He prays honestly.
And so often we wrap our prayers
even our private prayers in serendipitous platitudes.
Not because they reflect the core of our hearts, but because we believe that by praying our true feelings, we would be somehow faithless and dishonoring to the Lord.
Here's the thing, Tim Keller would often say that Psalms give us permission to feel the full
depth and breath of the human experience.
The Psalms, which are the worship book, the worship songs of the Hebrew people, they gave us full permission to feel the full depth and breath of the human experience.
They gave us permission to feel joy and sorrow, peace and fear, even anger.
The Psalms give us permission to feel anger.
And that's exactly what we see here in Jeremiah.
And it's what we see Jeremiah demonstrate and do.
He brings three things to God.
He brings his loneliness, he brings his hurt, and he brings his anger.
He brings his loneliness, his hurt, and his anger.
In verse 16 and 17, he says to the Lord, he says, your words
Your words were found and I ate them.
I sat alone because of your hand upon me.
Because of your hand upon me, I was alone.
Jeremiah is saying, you called me.
You called me.
I went all in.
I obeyed.
And what that has brought me
is isolation and loneliness.
Thanks, God.
Now, I've experienced this as a believer throughout my life.
Just recently, about a year and a half ago when I first started here at Crossway.
You see, I had been serving as a pastor in a church up in Laconia for 14 years.
And when I first started here for the first
three months that I was working here, I was still living up in Laconia.
It took us a while to sell our house and to find a house down this way.
And so every Sunday morning I would get in my truck and I would head off to church.
And I would come to this one traffic light where for three months straight, I had a very surreal experience from Sunday to Sunday.
You see, I could go left or right.
And my heart, my heart wanted to go right because I always turned right at that traffic light to go to my old church.
And the thing is, I was known in that church.
And I knew everyone in that church.
And I loved and missed them dearly and they loved and missed
me dearly.
But while my heart wanted to turn right, the call of God on my life said, go left.
And so I would travel down here.
And here's the thing.
I'm an extroverted person.
When I'm around people, I know.
But when I'm around people that I don't know, I'm kind of introverted.
And I get really insecure and kind of uncomfortable.
Luke's laughing.
He's like, I have a hard time believing that.
And so I would come down this way and I would be surrounded by people who I didn't know and it just took me time to get to know everyone.
And so for a number of months, I just felt really kind of lonely.
Let me invite you to do something simple
but important.
If you've ever felt lonely because of God's calling upon your life, I want to encourage you to shape that into a prayer.
Doesn't have to be polished, maybe just a simple phrase, but invite the Lord into your loneliness.
Why?
Well, because when we are in the presence of the Lord,
though no one else may be around us.
We're never truly alone, right?
So in what ways might the Lord's calling on your life be creating a sense of loneliness right now?
Because we're talking about prayer, I'm gonna give you some opportunities this morning to take a moment to pray.
And so I want you to do that right now.
I want you to just take a moment in silent prayer
and offer up your loneliness to the Lord.
Jesus thank you that we are never alone, that you are constantly present with us.
And not only that, but as we celebrated in communion, you came to this earth to be present with us in a very special way.
And so Lord, we rested in that this morning.
Amen.
Jeremiah continues on in verse 18, he says,
Why has my pain been perpetual and my wound incurable, refusing to be healed?
Jeremiah has an incurable wound, a heart that refuses to be healed.
Why?
Well, Jeremiah hurts because Jeremiah
loves.
Jeremiah hurts because Jeremiah loves.
Over my years in ministry, I've walked through more broken situations and aching loves than I ever expected I would.
In my first few years at my previous church, our congregation was deeply shaken by an affair within a pastoral family.
A few years later, the same church was rocked again when another key leader fell in a similar way.
And the years that followed, several more leaders experienced the same kind of moral failure.
And those were just the more visible moments.
At one point in time, I had calculated that in my time there,
Every two and a half years there had been an affair.
That stinks.
Now occasionally I lament with my fellow friends who are also in ministry.
My three best friends are all in ministry.
And occasionally I will lament with them and I will say to them, why do we do what we do?
Why do we do what we do?
This is hard work.
Not only that, it's not just hard work, it is heartbreaking work.
Why on earth do we do what we do?
If I go back and if I consider one of those situations, one of those men who fell, he ultimately left his wife
He abandoned his kids.
He left them emotionally destitute.
But the vacuum that he left in their lives, it opened up an opportunity for me.
This vacuum opened up an opportunity for me to step into the lives of his two oldest kids, his son and his daughter.
in a really significant way.
I was able to step into their lives as kind of like an older brother if not father type figure to them.
I had the privilege of doing both of their weddings.
They still call me when they need advice and help today.
As a pastor, I've often wished ministry hurt less, but I've come to realize if it didn't hurt, then it probably wouldn't be worth it.
If it didn't hurt, it probably wouldn't be worth it.
The hurt is often the very reason why we do what we do.
is let me tell you that brother and sister, their names are Dylan and Haley, and I have their permission to share this story this morning.
I can tell you right now they were worth it.
I love those kids like they're my own kids.
And while I am deeply grieved over the situations that has given me a special place in their life, I am absolutely thankful and happy for the opportunity
be in their lives.
So where do you hurt right now because you love someone?
Someone that you care about deeply.
How are you hurting and grieving for them this morning?
Again, I want to take just a moment in silent prayer and offer that hurt up to the Lord.
I didn't take a moment.
Jesus, I thank you for the immense capacity that you have given us to love and to care for one another.
Lord, never let us become jaded by the hurt that we encounter and the hurt that others encounter.
That helps us to love full of mercy and full of grace.
I pray.
Amen.
So Jeremiah doesn't
stop with loneliness and hurt, he even prays his anger.
He even prays his anger.
In the second half of verse 18, he says something startling.
He says, you will indeed be to me like a deceptive stream with water that is unreliable.
Now, earlier in Jeremiah chapter two, verse 13, Jeremiah said that God was a fountain of living waters.
Now he describes God as a deceptive brook, a dry streambed that looks promising but offers no water, right?
Picture that desert mirage in those old Bugs Bunny cartoons, right?
That's the image that Jeremiah is invoking here.
And in fact, Jeremiah is saying, God, I feel duped.
I feel duped.
You called me.
Not only that, I answered you.
I obeyed you.
And this is not at all what I was expecting.
Now, it feels like Jeremiah is crossing a line here.
And maybe he is.
But think about it this way.
Do you think it honors God when we mask our anger with insincere praise?
Do you think it honors God when we're really, really angry with him?
But then we go to church and we put our hands up in the air and say, I will praise you in the storm, Jesus.
Do you think that honors God?
Of course not.
And trying to force ourselves to feel an emotion we don't actually feel isn't going to solve the problem either, right?
It's like that old Bonnie Wright song.
I can make you love me if you don't.
You can make your heart feel
Something it won't, right?
Is it really a sermon if the pastor doesn't preach?
Doesn't sing, that's what I meant.
Now, Jeremiah doesn't mask his anger.
He doesn't try to discipline it away.
Instead, notice what he does do with this anger.
He doesn't bury it.
He doesn't deny it.
He doesn't take it somewhere else.
He brings it into relationship.
He brings it into the relationship.
He directs it towards the Lord.
That's why the Psalms are so wonderful.
That's why they do allow us to express every dimension of human emotion, because every dimension of human emotion is appropriate
when it is directed in the right direction and as towards the Lord in prayer.
When we present our emotions to Him and we surrender those emotions to Him.
So this morning, in what ways might the Lord's calling on your life be invoking anger right now?
Let's take a moment
silent prayer to offer up your anger to the Lord.
Jesus, we know that you're merciful enough and gracious enough to listen to every angry word that we could spew.
And we know that that same grace and mercy, it is also your healing compassion in our lives.
And so we pray that where the hurt is strong, where the anger is strong, Lord, we pray that you would hear our cry and heal our hearts.
Amen.
He invites us to bring our anger into relationship with Him, and when we do that, when we place even our most dangerous emotions before Him, something begins to happen.
In verse 19, Jeremiah stops speaking, but the prayer doesn't stop.
He stops speaking, but the prayer doesn't stop.
What happens?
God responds in verse 19.
God says, therefore, thus sayeth the Lord, if you return, then I will restore you.
Before me, you will stand.
This is a powerful moment.
The words Jeremiah has spoken to the people are now spoken to him.
The very message that he's been preaching is now being preached to him.
Just as Jeremiah has called the people to repent, God now calls Jeremiah to repent.
And while Jeremiah has been right to pray honestly, we can also detect something else beginning to take root.
Just a hint of self pity.
the loneliness, the hurt, and the anger, none of that is wrong.
But choosing to remain there is.
Self-pity is not the same thing as grief.
Self-pity is by definition an excessive, self-absorbed sorrow over my own troubles with no regard to anyone else.
It assumes subtly that God cannot heal what has been broken.
He simply doesn't have enough power.
What is not wrong is feeling hurt.
What is wrong is insisting on staying there in a way that removes God from the equation.
Self-pity, it makes our God
way too small.
But in the words of Thomas Moore, earth has no sorrow that heaven cannot heal.
And in the words of Jesus, in this world, you will have trouble, but take heart.
Why?
Because I have overcome the world.
There was a time recently when I brought my hurt and my anger and my loneliness to the Lord.
I just put it all out there.
And I was like, Lord, I have had it.
I have had it.
I am hurt.
I am angry.
I am lonely.
I just put it all out there to the Lord.
And you know what happened?
He listened to me.
Some of you have heard me say this before.
My favorite verse in all of scripture is Psalm 116, verse one.
I love the Lord.
Why?
Because he hears my voice.
He listened to me.
He met me where I was.
He gave me scripture to encourage me.
He gave me friends in supporting fellow partners and ministry who came around me in my discouragement.
He listened to my fear, to my anger, to my frustration.
He received it all.
He ministered to me, and then you know what he did?
He said, all right, enough's enough.
Get up, pick up your cross, and follow me.
What about you this morning?
Is there a troubling narrative that you've been living in one that carries even a little bit of a hint of self pity?
Ask God to rewrite that script this morning.
To remind you that you are not just called, but you are beloved and that you are not just beloved, but you are most certainly not
abandoned.
Repentance after all means changing how we think and how we act in light of the good news that God is still at work in this world and that he cares about us deeply.
So in what ways might you be stuck in self-pity this morning?
Take just a moment in silent prayer to turn the Lord to the Lord in repentance.
Lord, thank you that you allow us to bring our hurt, our anger, and our loneliness before you.
Lord, may we receive from you the healing our hearts need.
And Lord, where there is a temptation to just remain, to remain in that place, temptation to grow embittered towards you and towards others,
Just throw a little continual, never-ending pity party for ourselves.
Lord, call us away from that.
We repent of that this morning.
Change our minds, and then so changing our minds and changing our hearts, change the way we live.
And then,
Following God's call to repent, the Lord helps Jeremiah reestablish his priorities.
So in verse 19 he says, if you extract the precious from the worthless, you will become my spokesman.
They for their part may turn to you, but as for you, you must not turn to them.
God reminds Jeremiah of his calling.
And it's a hard calling, but here's the thing about hard callings.
They're often high callings.
God does not call us to an easy life.
He does not call us to an easy life.
He calls us to an obedient life.
There's a scene in,
One of the Harry Potter films where Dumbledore, he turns to Harry and he says something tough, but profoundly true.
He says, Harry, a time is coming when you must choose between doing what is easy and doing what is right.
A time is coming when you must choose between doing what is easy
and doing what is right.
When me and my fellow pastors, when we ask ourselves, why do we do what we do?
When we ask that question, we're not asking a faithless question.
When we ask that question of each other, the others
chime in and they remind us of all the reasons we have chosen to follow after the Lord's calling on our lives.
They remind us of all the reasons, all the wonderful reasons.
And see, here's the thing.
Jesus is calling.
It isn't a one time decision.
We are called to continually reorder our priorities, constantly assessing, evaluating and continually making the decision to follow after the Lord as the circumstances in our life change.
Years ago, I heard a story about an altar called a youth rally.
And the pastor did this author call and this one student came up and that pastor said, are you ready to offer your life to Jesus?
And the student said, yes.
Are you willing to follow after him with all your life?
Yes.
Are you willing to follow after him even though that may mean that he wants you to be poor?
Are you willing to follow after him, even though that might mean that he might take you clear to the other side of the world to do it?
Are you willing to follow after him if he calls you away from your loved ones?
If he takes away your family?
And he continued and continued and continued until that student said, no, I'm not.
Jesus' calling is not a one-time decision.
We're called to continually reorder our priorities.
And as Jeremiah reorders his priorities, God offers renewal.
Verse 20, God says to Jeremiah, he says, then I will make you to this people a fortified wall of bronze.
And though they fight against you, they will not prevail over you.
for I am with you to save you and to deliver you.
I will deliver you from the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem you from the grasp of the violent.
God doesn't say, I will make things easy for you.
He says, I will make you stronger.
I will make you stronger.
Which would you prefer?
Would you prefer things to be easy?
Would you prefer to be made stronger?
10 years ago this year, I had a seizure and I was diagnosed with a brain tumor.
I learned shortly after that, that that tumor would have to be forcibly removed from my head because it did not belong there.
Now the good news is,
That tumor was benign.
The bad news is because it was benign, because it was not cancerous, I was in the back of the line for waiting for operations.
And so I had to wait for six months with very detailed knowledge of exactly what was going to happen to my head.
Now, I started off that time.
I started to pray.
I was like, Lord, Lord, please just just remove the tumor from my head.
Just let it be a miracle.
Next time I go for my MRI, just let it be gone.
And I prayed that way, and I prayed that way, and I prayed that way.
And over that six month period of time, I prayed that way less and less and less.
Until the week before that surgery, we were down in Boston at Mass General
for my final doctor's appointment before the surgery.
And as we sat in this hallway in the neurosurgery department of Mass General Hospital, this beautiful glass panoramic view of the city, as we sat in that space, I quietly reflected and I had the most profound sense of peace that I've ever had in my entire
life.
Why?
Well, because God, he whispers in our pleasures, but he was shouting in my pain.
He was shouting in my pain.
And in doing so, he was drawing me to him.
And I, I would never want to go through that again.
I am
Incredibly thankful for that experience because I feel like it is through that experience that the Lord really taught me how to pray.
And it's through that experience that he has matured me in significant ways that I could have never imagined.
I made me much stronger in my faith than I could ever imagined.
He was shouting in my pain and he got my attention.
So how might
God be shouting in your pain this morning.
How might he be shouting in your pain this morning?
I asked that question because where he shouts in your pain, that is the very place that he wants to meet you.
It is the very place that he wants to meet you.
Eugene Peterson, he closes out his thoughts on the prayer life of Jeremiah with these words.
He says, prayer is not so much the place where we learn something new, but where God confirms anew the faith to which we are committed.
Prayer it gives.
perspective.
It replenishes us.
And prayer is where God gives us our daily bread, that very thing that we need today and only today.
Amen.
Let's pray.
Jesus, thank you for loving us so much.
Thank you for wanting to know us.
Thank you for wanting us to know us so much that you left the splendor of heaven to enter into this world, to suffer and die on our behalf, to bring us into right relationship with you.
Lord, thank you that we can come before you and that we can bring our grief, that we can bring our loneliness and we can find relationship.
We can bring our hurt
and be refreshed by your joy.
We can even bring our anger and have our wounds healed and peace overwhelm our souls.
Thank you, Jesus, in your name.
Amen.
Thanks for listening to the Crossway Christian Church's Milford Campus Sermon Podcast.
If you'd like to plug into the life of our community or have any questions that we might be able to answer, visit our website at crosswaycc.org to connect with us.
Until next time, we can be with you.
May the Lord bless you and keep you.